---
date: 2009-12-31
title: The Importance of Words in Brainstorming
published: false
---
It seems to me pictures have become a much bigger part of the way we communicate these days, largely due to the internet, perhaps. Of the 95 RSS feeds I am subscribed to, only two or three ever have the backbone to post content free of pictures, and a solid five or six only post images. While I may agree with the ol’ adage “A picture is worth 1000 words,” I hope people aren’t forgetting how valuable and powerful a word can be.

With this time between semesters comes not a break, but rather a frenzied attempt from me to finish, or at least start, all of the self initiated or otherwise school-unrelated projects I have piled up for myself over the last six months. This means I have been doing a lot of brainstorming recently, and with some reflection I have come to realize that my methods for working through ideas are almost completely based on words. While I think most people sit down and start sketching to hash out ideas, I tend to start writing.

Words hold such power because they are a hot medium, as McLuhan would say. An image is flat and tells the whole story; if it is crisp and in focus, it leaves little to no room for interpretation (of the image itself at least, the “concept” that produced the image is a whole different matter). A word however, is completely unique, not just to other words, but to every individual person. In reality, there are no true synonyms: big, huge, gigantic and massive may be more or less interchangeable, but each evokes a slightly different feeling. I have found these nuanced differences between words to be the best way for me to represent, sort and generate my ideas. Once I have found a set of words, maybe two or three, maybe twenty or thirty, that I think represents the idea I have, the sketching process becomes an investigation into what these words look like, both in and out of context of the words surrounding them. You’d be amazed at the scope and scale of visuals that can spring from something as simple as “What does authenticity look like?”

May your 2010 be even better than your 2009!
