---
date: 2010-10-07
title: Social Design &amp; Design by Committee
---
I had the opportunity to watch (a couple of times, actually) the documentary [_Citizen Architect_](http://citizenarchitectfilm.com/ "Citizen Architect") almost a month ago. I have been stewing over the film, as well as social design in general, ever since, and I wanted to share some of my thoughts and perhaps start one of them fancy internet discussion things.

I should say that this “article” assumes the reader has a basic knowledge of what the Rural Studio is and does, so if you’re uninitiated, do yourself a favor and [get acquainted with this amazing program](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Rural_Studio "The Rural Studio").

One of the more interesting dynamics in the film for me was the relationship between Mockbee, the founder of the rural studio, and Peter Eisenman, who seems to be, either through philosophy or choice editing, Sambo’s foil. Eisenman is of the opinion that a good architect should know, for all his or her schooling and education, what the occupants of a certain building should want and need from it. Therefore, he feels as though he does not have to interact with his customer/audience to build effective and successful structures. This idea sounds dangerous and elitist, and I think it’s safe to say that he is demonized a bit in the film for it. At first, I was shocked by his arrogance and disinterest in the people inhabiting his buildings; I am realizing more and more and more that my interest in people is what draws me to design. But the more I watched and thought about it, he does make an interesting point that I think deserves a more thorough investigation: as a graphic designer, I often find myself surrounded by bad taste, I often find that my clients choose the worst options I provide them with for a certain project, I often embarrassingly wish that the tools of creation would be snatched from the clutches of those people who insist on setting every bit of typography on the menu in Curlz MT. I feel a little Eisenmany saying it, but I think that I often know what is better for my clients than they do; that is why they hired me after all, is it not?

This, as well as my impending graduation, has left me in a bit of a identity crisis. I believe strongly in the tenets of social design; but all of a sudden the Mockbee Eisenman showdown has blurred the line between it and Design by Committee. The difference, which at first seemed minute to me, is actually quite substantial: what it comes down to is what the designer does with the information he or she has. It is asinine to intentionally deprive oneself of any potentially valuable information, and for this reason Eisenman’s refusal to interact with his audience is unreasonable. However, he seems to have linked talking with them to doing whatever they say, which is not a sustainable or effective model either. The truth is, as a designer we are neither the all knowing provider, nor a mercenary merely doing the bidding of the masses, we ideally fall somewhere in between. I think the process should be about taking in everything, every suggestion idea and experience available, and digesting it, applying all of the wonderful things we learn in our design education. At the end of the day, if we have done our job, I think we know better (or perhaps just more thoroughly) what is best for our clients than they do. We know what’s best for them because we truly know them, not because of what we read in a textbook or learned from a professor.

This is actually the most exciting thing about design for me, more exciting than letterpress, clever illustrations, effective brands, or brightly colored t-shirts with big letters on them: in the interest of being good at my job, I get to spend my time talking to and learning from a diverse set of people. Every project is a new subject I get to become an expert in, every client a new story I get to explore.

Everyone should watch this film, especially if you are a designer of any sort. It wasn’t the best from a documentary perspective, but the content is invaluable and thought provoking.
